#summary how to change the name "ThisWorkbook" in vba
#labels Phase-Requirements,Phase-Design,Phase-Deploy

= Introduction =

 * how to change the name "!ThisWorkbook" in vba

== 概要 ==
 * VBAで "!ThisWorkbook" という名前を変える

= Details =

 * small tips arround the !ThisWorkbook.
 * anyway, Microsoft clearly says that changing the name is NOT recommended even by hands on VBIDE.

== 説明 ==
 * !ThisWorkbook 周辺のいろいろ
 * いずれにせよ、マイクロソフトはこれを !ThisWorkbook 以外に変更するのはお奨めしないと明言している。たとえ開発ウィンドウで手で変更するとしてもだ。

= Cases =

=== Case 1 ===

 * change "!ThisWorkbook" to "bok"
    !ThisWorkbook を bok に変える

==== NG ====

{{{
ThisWorkbook.VBProject.VBComponents("ThisWorkbook").Name = "bok"
}}}

 * above codes destroy the book.
    上記の方法は、ブックを破壊する。
 * after you save it, you can never open it.
    保存したら最後、二度と開けない。
 * the above changes only the project pane, no changes at the properties pane.
    この方法はプロジェクトペインの表示だけ変更して、プロパティまでは変更していない。

==== OK ====

{{{
ThisWorkbook.VBProject.VBComponents("ThisWorkbook").Properties("_CodeName") = "bok"
}}}

 * the above is working, and the book is not broken yet.
    上記の方法は機能するし、今のところブックも壊れていない
 * anyway i don't want to do it.
    でも自分で使おうとは思わない。

==== why? ====

 # there're 2 properties for the !CodeName, "!CodeName" and "{{{_}}}!CodeName".
    !CodeName 関連では "!CodeName" と "{{{_}}}!CodeName" と、２つのプロパティがある。
 # the former is safe, readonly.
    前者は読み出し専用で安全なもの。
 # the latter seems to be defined to do something not recommended, so I did.
    後者は推奨できない理由で定義されてるように思えて、試してみた。
 # at least, the "{{{_}}}!CodeName" changes both the project and properties pane.
    とりあえずこれなら、プロジェクトとプロパティの両方を変更してくれる。

=== Case 2 ===

 * modify VBA source codes in the !ThisWorkbook by VBA
    !ThisWorkbook の VBA コードを、 VBA で書き換える
 * sometime it success, many time it fail, I don't know why yet.
    成功するときもあるが、失敗することが多い。理由は不明
 * this causes a no return fall of Excel itself.
    失敗するとエクセルごと落ちる
 * it may be,,, i think,
    # source code change of the !ThisWorkbook let Excel to recompile the project.
    # after that, any changes of source raise an unrecoverable Excel error.
    # thus changing the code at the last of the VBA task may bring a lucky result.
 * たぶん、こういうことか、、、
    # !ThisWorkbook のコードを書き換えると、エクセルが再コンパイルを開始する。
    # この後に何か他のソースを変更すると、エクセルが回復不能なエラーを起こす。
    # よって、こいつを書き換えるのを一連の作業の最後にすると、いい結果を生むのかも。


